[Music]
welcome to church history and theology a
study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages
our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways let's go look into one of
those influences today on church history
and
[Music]
theology well good evening everyone
welcome to church history and theology
tonight is a fascinating episode that
I've been uh long and coming working on
um that is Rome of the first Century but
before we get into that I just want to
take a minute and set aside uh a
notation let you know about something
that happened this past week um I got to
join um on a show called two Creations
one Creator headed up by a very
impressive young man named Isaac Bush we
got to talk about life and church
history and Christian witness and the
responsibilities that Christians have
towards the future and it was an
absolute pleasure of mine uh to sit down
and talk about this and I want to show
you share with you a short sample listen
to
this there is no idealized golden age of
church history there is just fallible
people and somehow through all of that
God is preserving his infallible plan
and I I love
it that's awesome I never I have never
thought of it that way because I've
always been like a big advocate of like
saying oh we need to be like the church
for acts but that's like no yeah that's
that's an excellent point but you're
saying like yeah everyone in history is
failable we are created for today people
of Tomorrow created for tomorrow right
that's awesome I've never
like I've never thought of it that way
so I'm just kind of like taking that in
like processing it we are we are in a
flow of church history we we are we
can't remove ourselves from it we can't
be unaffected by it uh and we have a
responsibility to hand down to the next
Generations the story that belongs to us
this this is our story this is our
family and and we have descendants after
us future Christians that need to know
this stuff it was a great time of
Brotherly fellowship and I would
encourage you all go listen to the
interview links are in the description
and special thanks to you Isaac I look
forward to talking with you again now
tonight's subject as I have already said
is Rome of the first
century Rome is a dicey term and it's
one of of those that I want to express
to you my main focus here is the city of
Rome but there is no way to talk about
the city of Rome without discussing all
sorts of other things that had affected
the whole empire uh the the Imperial
line which emperor was doing what when
and so this is going to be an odd mix of
church history and Roman history uh and
as well as some Jewish history and the
point being that these things are so
intertwined in the first century that uh
we really can't pull them apart from
each other without missing massive
sections so rather than trying to pay
attention only to say Rome for all of
history I have devised to talk about
this in chunks and tonight is just going
to relegate it to the first century and
so I'm not looking to go past the the
reign of demission this evening so we're
going to be discussing uh pretty much
from the very beginning of of the uh of
the Empire uh to the to the end of the
flavian dynasty if you are a fan of
Roman history and also of church history
well you've hit your jackpot tonight
because we're actually going to be
mixing them all together if you're not a
fan of Roman history but love church
history at least I can uh maybe W your
appetite a bit for understanding which
which uh Emperor was going on where and
when uh one thing was going on here what
was going on over there and how these
things kind of all melt together if
you're anything like me when you study
church history or when you study regular
history you have a timeline in your head
and you tend to keep that timeline
parallel with other things going on you
don't really you know bind them together
very much and so sometimes it's a little
bit surprising who it is is you know
living at the same time as other people
so this is kind of one of those studies
that I got to piece together that uh
that made some connections that I had
actually never put together uh so I got
to learn a bunch in prepping this one
and I hope to pass that on to you so
let's get into this Rome if you are
unaware is the center of the world at
this point the first century has seen uh
an inheritance of something brand new in
the world and that is the Roman Empire
before this it was the Roman Republic
you had you had a senate you had uh a
certain way that it had established
itself after the conquest of so much of
the land around the Mediterranean Basin
but Rome itself was unable to hold on to
a republic it uh as famously retold in
Shakespearean plays and many movies
since then and certain several books uh
on the on the uh The Happening of
dictator for Life Julius Caesar after
him and his uh let's just say his
untimely uh uh departure from this world
um a whole new version of Rome came into
existence uh and while this is again not
primarily a Roman history class it
really Bears uh to the mind to to open
up about the rulers and kind of their
their happenings at least to have some
hooks into some of the things we know in
church history and in the New Testament
if you are ever at a Christmas Eve
service I'm certain you've heard of
uh the decree that went out by Caesar
Augustus that all the world should be
taxed there in Luke Chapter 2 Caesar
Augustus is the first
emperor after the death of Julius Caesar
and all sorts of other squabblings and
so forth when we finally figure out who
the first emperor is and and in
retrospect look back and rebuild all
this history we we come to Augustus
Caesar or Caesar Augustus he is the
Caesar uh of Act of Luke Chapter 2 and
he serves for a tremendous amount of
time uh nearly 40 years he is the uh he
is the Caesar there and takes care of
all manner of things we're not going to
be focusing on him too much because
again church history he's the uh he's
the Caesar uh during the time of the
birth of Jesus and the Early Childhood
of Jesus he dies in the year 14 ad and
so that would make him uh not the Caesar
of later stories in the New Testament
after him is
tiberias this would be the emperor
during Jesus's Ministry he takes he
takes on the role in the year 14 ad and
continues that for 23 years to the year
37 ad so this is the emperor during
Jesus's Ministry uh the day of Pentecost
and the very early versions of the chur
Church in
Rome now as far as for the history of
Rome the city itself is a remarkable
Place uh it it holds a centrality due to
all of it establishing itself during the
first century while it's doing that we
see this parallel establishing and that
is of the church in Rome the church in
Rome if you remember the story of the
day of Pentecost um was likely begun by
Jews who were visiting
into Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost
because in Acts
2:10 we have that visitors from Rome
Jews were there and present and heard
the
gospel presumably they traveled back and
began house churches and eventually
leading to no small dissension among
their kin the Jews of the city of Rome
in fact there was many early tensions
between Jewish and Gentile Believers and
there was sever several instances where
the Romans for the next several decades
tried to figure out how to distinguish
between Jews and
Christians it had been very difficult
because the concept of being a Jew was
not simply a ethnic uh expression but
also a religious expression and then to
be a Christian most of them in the early
days especially would be seen as both
Jews and as Christians and it was for
the Romans quite confusing this
understanding of maybe the Christians
are a sect of Judaism they're a part of
this they use the same scriptures and
the Roman Empire for the first about
hundred years could not fully
distinguish between Jews and
Christians later on one of the ways that
they were able to distinguish between
Jews and Christians uh in the early 2nd
Century is that Jews defended themselves
and Christians
wouldn't Jews by and large were quite
militaristic and especially when
self-defense
came about but Christians were almost
unanimously pacifists in the first
centuries and so that was one of these
things that the uh Romans could use to
distinguish them now lest you think that
uh there was there was an assumption of
nobility connected with pacifism not in
the Roman culture no fighting back was
seen as respectful that you respect your
life to be a pacifist or not to um
defend your own life is to you say that
you don't value your life enough to
defend it why should I value it enough
not to take it from you those types of
things uh seriously get into the issues
of uh of the the issues that that Rome
had with Christians and deciding who
they were with regards to their Jewish
ancestry and at least to their eyes
looking very familiar to
them well the visitors from Rome that we
find in Acts 2: 10 presumably return
back to Rome and begin a church there uh
house churches several of them this
would have been the Habit everywhere uh
in the earliest sections of the church
in the earliest times of the church and
this would be still very very early
Apostolic Ministry now again I want to
Simply emphasize here um if you don't
recall this you can go back to uh our
lesson on Peter um I I want to dispel
any concept on the front end Peter in no
way has anything to do with founding the
church in Rome outside of you know his
role on the day of Pentecost and if you
want to call that founding the church
well there was Christians from every
nation uh among the uh the Mediterranean
Basin that were present there uh that
had come and repent and were baptized
and uh joined the church and and even
some who then returned home as well and
so there there was nothing unique about
the church in Rome yet the church in
Rome does come become quite unique later
on but at this point it's what makes it
unique is that it's in the capital
city and the capital city is not some
small place it is not some you know uh
minor role that a church in Rome would
play a church in Rome is going to play a
central role because it's going to be
where all roads lead it's going to be
where when things happen it's going to
kind of be in the center of it not
because it has some authority over and
against everything that that doesn't
happen until centuries from
now it has a familiarity a centrality if
you will right we we see the same thing
with with churches even today in in in
denominations that aren't built on this
kind of a concept where a a church that
is in in a larger city is going to be
more prominent in people's Minds than an
equally valuable church that's in a
small
town that's just the nature of it it's
how humans think about things um the
same thing goes for businesses you know
you're not going to find just the amount
of people outside of a city as you will
inside of a City Rome is by the time we
come to the first century it's getting
enormous it is becoming a Powerhouse of
the world um and kind of the centrality
of that really affects the way that the
church in Rome functions but this is one
of the great things about the church in
Rome we never have any indication that
gets full of itself in the first century
at all in fact when you read uh Paul's
epistle to this church in that he writes
in the year 57 you do not get any
concept of Correction nothing like the
church in Corinth not because they were
perfect or anything but because they
didn't have massive issues like that
they had just a unique relationship with
being doctrinally sound and that's
marvelous so did the church in Ephesus
by the way and so did the church in
colasse to a certain extent the church
in Philippi even more so right and the
church in thessalonica just on a level
unheard of in any other city but Rome is
one of these great cities and and has
marvelous Church inside of it one that
that Paul uh holds very dear to his
heart actually saves the longest letter
that he writes for that church and uh
and a remarkable thing indeed but we're
getting ahead of ourselves with that in
the early days there was a lot of
tension between Jewish and Gentile
Believers uh there was there was
difficulties in assessing how it is the
relationship between the law how it is
between uh uh those who are Gentiles now
following a messiah but even more than
that you had tensions arising when Jews
and uh became Jewish Christians and the
relationship they had with their
families that led to such a problematic
thing that we actually have to deal with
it in
history and deal with it we
will after Augustus comes tiberias as we
discussed Tiberius dies in the year 37
and then we have uh a
4-year instance of Caligula if you know
anything about Roman history you'll
know the infamous reign of Caligula only
four years long nothing of note that
we're going to take uh that we're going
to take issue with here with Caligula um
but we are going to uh jump Straight
Ahead after Caligula to the next Emperor
the fourth emperor of the uh of the
Empire and that is
Claudius Claudius serves for 13 years as
Emperor and he was a very unexpected
Emperor he was quite an Adept ruler uh
very effective good
administrator um oversaw expansion into
Britain and so forth but as for the city
of Rome he was more of a developer of
new things uh excuse me he was a
developer more than he was of doing new
things he added more aqueducts he had
more agriculture set up more grain uh
trade that there was uh more games um
you know more trade this was this was
kind of his is just expanding and
growing and growing
he had some spouse issues uh he was um
well he had her and her I'll keep this
PG her uh her friend put to death uh and
one of the things we actually see is uh
what comes up is in Acts chapter 18 this
is the Caesar in Acts chapter 18 verse 2
that expels the Jews from Rome in the
year
49 in fact we have the Roman history
suon
uh who mentions disturbances that were
caused by cresus uh which would be the
Latin version of Christ that there was a
disagreement among the Jews in the city
of Rome so significant that he threw
them all out whatever exactly happened I
think it's pretty straightforward what
would have happened it would have been
whatever was going on in Jerusalem just
exploded into Rome these would have been
Christians that had Jewish Heritage that
were arguing that had disputes with Jews
who were not Messianic and following
Christ and so there was significant
issues that actually led to the
expulsion of Jews from Rome and that is
the majority of the earliest church now
that doesn't mean that there's no
Christians left in the city of Rome
Gentile Believers would have stayed
there and so this kind of whole
relationship that goes on and then
there's an expulsion of Jews expulsion
of Jewish Christians well that doesn't
last forever but it lasts a good while
um it really goes until the end of
claudius's reign as best as we can piece
together and so that's another four or
five years um until Claudius is poisoned
by his new wife so her son could become
emperor uh and that's kind of how
Claudius ended his Reign at this point
Christians presumably were able to
return back to Rome and those who wanted
to if you remember in in the book of
Acts even um uh even those like
Priscilla and Aquilla were uh were cast
out of Rome at this time and um
presumably after the reign of Claudius
would have been able to return
back well after
Claudius his wife's son becomes
Emperor the uh the
famed uh Emperor named Nero and and he
takes over in the year 54 and here's
where really our major story starts
taking over because as far as for
everything that's going on in the New
Testament you know we just kind of
passed over a lot of sections that we
just don't know the datings of in
certain things but once we come to uh
the late 50s and the early and mid 60s
now we have all sorts of New Testament
tie-ins and the reign of Nero overlaps
all of this so for instance when when
Paul
is um appealing to Caesar the Caesar at
the time is Nero he's a crazy person uh
he is he is he serves as Caesar for 14
years um he's only 16 years old when he
comes to power and becomes Emperor so
makes perfect sense why he would be
crazy well his mother uh agrina just a
beautiful name if any of you are having
little girls lately agripina is a name
you should probably suggest to your uh
to suggest to your wife um his mother uh
the Widow of Claudius ruled through him
in the early days well she later on Nero
ended up having her killed that's all
whole another story but um and
afterwards kind of was Guided by senica
and burus and some of these others but
it kind of descends into all sorts of
paranoid tyrannical things he loved
theater and games he really loved
Chariot racing uh but more than that he
loved singing and playing the heart and
and acting things that Emperors do not
do well some of the things that are
going on during his Reign that that tie
us in with church history really kind of
grounds some of the stuff that we know
when when Paul is in Corinth and he
writes to the Church of Rome what we
know of as the book of Romans this is
during the reign of Nero this is in the
year 50 7 ad again Nero is serving from
54 to
68 in the year
60 uh Paul arrives in
Rome and he had appealed to Caesar
that's Nero at the time and is under
house arrest and awaiting trial and he
writes many of his letters his prison
Epistles from here and others there is
some story that Paul was uh released for
a short time and arrested again and um
and and so forth that would have
probably been about the year
63 it is about the year 63 at least as
best as I can piece together that Peter
and his wife arrive in Rome for reasons
actually unknown and for best as we can
tell with any actual reliable data this
is the first time they've been to Rome
that doesn't mean it is we just don't
know before that um why he is there
we're not really sure it it one theory
is that he is there as part of the
defense for Paul uh there's actually a
theory going around in scholarship right
now that uh Luke writes the book of Acts
as a defense for Paul which is why it
ends where it ends um Peter may have
been there backing up the claims that
are in there since the first third of
the book is about him but that lend some
Credence but we really don't know but
what we do know is that Paul and Peter
are both in Rome in the mid-60s and
they're in Rome when the Great Fire of
Rome breaks
out the Great fire of Rome breaks out in
the year
64 and what happens is that Nero
immediately blames the Christians for
this why he blames the Christians for
this is something we do not fully
understand um but you get multiple Roman
accounts of this as well saying we were
aware that it wasn't the Christians that
did this but it was Nero himself that
did this wanting
to actually you know scapegoat
Christians in order to put forward his
own building projects uh because he
started magnificent building projects
right after the fire uh really didn't
help quell down any of these suspicions
tacitus actually writes of this that uh
the the fire was an absolute devastation
of the city um and there was a lot of
people sus suspicious of Nero's
involvement not just officially um but
even in the streets people just citizens
uh that gets really difficult well Nero
uses the Christians as a
scapegoat and he does it in pretty
horrible ways every historical Testament
that we have regarding this is that it
was brutal um tortures public
executions crucifixions beheadings um
all manner uh of all manner of things
going on during nuro's persecution one
of the concepts though of this that I
want to quell is the idea that this was
somehow Empire wide or anything like
that Nero's Nero's persecution of the
Christians was not empire-wide it wasn't
even all peninsula of Italy wide it was
Rome and the surrounding areas just the
city and so this is one of those one of
those concrete moments in Roman history
that we understand to have been the
source of persecution of Christians
um there's others that are have more
question marks but neros is well
documented um the church during the
reign of
Nero really
had um difficulty explaining itself why
it is that Christians were blamed for
this is something that we really don't
fully know there are a few theories
about it there's a few ways to piece
things together but their return after
the Jews were expelled Jews tend to not
really return back to um to Rome in the
same kind of numbers that Christians do
so there may have just been an ongoing
Prejudice that that alongside the idea
that Christians are just absolutely
pigheaded just like Jews were with
regards to we are not going to worship
the Roman Gods uh we are not going to
give money or say prayers to Idols we're
not going to do any of these things uh
both Christians and Jews are very
pigheaded about this kind of stuff and
rightly so um but one of the one of the
theories I think one of the ones that
convinces me a little bit more is that
that Jews that would expelled from Rome
that weren't Christians did not return
in the same numbers as the Christians
after the expulsion and and Claudius and
Cula and all this so it may have just
been an ongoing
problem and as far as the public was
concerned uh those annoying christians
of course no problem and you know
whether or not Nero is doing this
because he thinks the Christians
actually did this or he's doing this to
gain public favor who knows we I who
knows what goes on this guy's head um as
far as Christians are concerned a very
misunderstood minority uh often
conflated with the Jews so there's even
more problems with that because honestly
the Jews and the Romans are not getting
along very good either at this time the
mid-60s are horrific uh and by the time
we really delve into this um you you
have just a whole pile of confusion
about what's been going on well here's
kind of the crazy
thing the time we're not quite to the
flavian dynasty yet but the time that
goes on towards the end of Nero's
Reign the Jewish Revolt in Judea starts
and that would be the year
66 now here's kind of a bigger part of
this the the issues that were going on
in Judea absolutely influence some of
the things that are going on in Rome so
do the ones going on in Rome influence
the ones going on in Judea this this
whole thing is intertwined in ways that
we really can't fully grasp now Nero has
all of his problems at home he loves to
be at home he's um bit of a strange
cookie as it is when the Jewish Revolt
breaks out in
Judea uh in the year 66 ad uh one of the
most popular generals is actually sent
to quell and subdue this and it's a man
named
vpan uh his conquering of the
countryside and Judea uh the subjugation
of everything in the North and then
coming down and stopping short of
actually coming up to Jerusalem yet um
some of the stories that come out of
this are just
mindblowing um with with the amount of
brutality that goes on um
and vispa at this time returns to Rome
there was there was some needs to happen
there and he left a lot of this in the
hands of his son a man named Titus and
we'll come back to him in just a little
bit in the year 68 ad so a year and a
half two years into this Judean quelling
Nero commits
suicide the senate had declared him An
Enemy of the State due to a whole host
of issues and well mainly n was just the
worst and so upon committing suicide um
the entirety of the Roman Empire for the
next year kind of falls into a one of
its shortest Civil Wars uh in the year
69 it or in 68 uh it is known as the
year of four
Emperors and there is a civil
war it lasts pretty short by the year uh
69 we have vaspian actually become
installed as Emperor by all of the uh
military all these others that were
attempting to do things there was there
was uh short little Emperor Serv you
know five months here four months this
you know that kind of stuff but as far
as for Meaningful Emperor vaspian is the
next one he starts in the year
69 now I want you to think with me on
this
when when Nero had put his persecution
out to the church in Rome two very
notable Figures were put to death there
uh as far as all history is concerned
everyone is unanimous on this Paul and
Peter were both martyred in
Rome now as far as for the actual method
and how this
worked uh Paul being a Roman citizen uh
and what we have from history as well
fits perfectly was beheaded
and buried in Rome Peter not being a
citizen of Rome uh was crucified this
would have been common to do so um he
was also according to uh multiple
accounts uh his wife was martyred right
before him uh at which point he
encouraged her to remember the Lord and
uh the story of him being crucified
upside down is a later embellishment uh
from The Acts of Peter that's uh
something that I would I would take with
a very large grain of salt um that he
was crucified however is is almost
undoubtable um and that uh that plays um
a role in the future he was buried in
Rome as well best as we can uh piece
together um again you're separated out
from a lot of history here but um it is
it is wise for us to take note of that
as we pass by it even before we come to
the flavian dynasty here starting in the
year 69
by the year
69 the Jewish
Revolt uh in in Judea is at a fever
pitch uh vespasian's leadership in the
war was up to the year 68 he left the
command of his son uh to his son Titus
and returned to Rome becoming emperor in
the year
69 the year 70 is absolutely Central to
Jewish history because it is when Titus
destroys the temple in the year 70 AD
The Siege of Jerusalem and the
destruction of the temple is a subject
for another episode that is not going to
be my focus here we will talk about it
on another episode because there was
aftermath for both Jews and Christians
in the Empire uh that is really
important um but I don't want you to
think that I'm passing over that it's
just not the subject of tonight's
episode but the reason I bring it up is
because it is the the effect that it had
on the city of Rome still be seen when
you visit
Rome Vespasian restores the stability
after the chaos of Nero's death in the
year of the four Emperors the short
Civil War that took place Christians
recover from Nero's persecution uh that
that immediate persecution of Nero's
Reign where um you have some of the more
gruesome pictures that are given to us
um uh even even to the point of uh him
covering them in pitch and uh hanging
them on stakes and lighting them on fire
during Garden parties that that the kind
of stuff that Nero was involved in was
was insane people hated this guy and um
but but he
also misused funds and built things for
himself he built this huge uh Golden
House for himself uh and his own
Colossus of Nero his own version of
himself uh testimonies are that it was
anywhere from 100 to 12 20 ft tall um
you know this kind of stuff doesn't
really sit well with a populace
especially when you're taxing them for
things that are are Beyond anyone's
sanity
well the the fascinating thing is that
when Vespasian came to power he stopped
a lot of the insanity a lot of the waste
and what he ended up doing was using a
lot of the valuables that his son took
Titus took from the Temple of Jerusalem
uh to fund the building of the
Coliseum the funny part about this story
and vaspian is the one who Begins the
Coliseum here but the funny part of the
story is that Nero's famed Golden House
was on the side of the Coliseum
first complete with artificial lakes and
as I already mentioned the Colossus of
Nero uh a a 100 plus foot tall statue uh
yes depicting um him naked um if you've
ever seen a picture of Nero you'd
understand just how much the citizenry
uh hated
having all of that over their heads uh
vaspian had it all demolished and all
raised to the ground and built the
Coliseum and then there is a in fact if
you actually visit the Coliseum I got to
see this last year right next to the
Coliseum around the backside is an Arch
of Triumph as well and it is Titus is
Arch they are depicting all the
treasures coming from the Jewish temple
you have Manas and everything else uh
really awesome stuff still standing
there to this day um amazing achievement
right all of the wealth that comes from
Judea and Jerusalem pours into Rome they
they use it to help uh and they also
take everything that Nero had done and
melt all this kind of stuff down they
they used it to build the
Coliseum well vaspian had two
significant Sons Titus who is the elder
brother and his younger brother
demission vaspian dies of sickness about
10 years into his Reign uh and becomes
the first emperor to be succeeded by his
own biological son before this it was
adopted Sons or grand nephews or um you
know stepsons things like this so Titus
actually becomes Emperor after vaspian
it was is the natural
thing um Titus essentially was the very
definition of living in the shadow of
his own father Vespasian was loved by a
lot of people and he was a very well
attuned leader uh well attuned Emperor
and as far as for uh management and
administration and everything else was
concerned Vespasian was one of the best
that they've had so far Titus um has a
very short range and unfortunately was
marked by a number of natural
disasters uh and so this is almost
everything Titus is remembered for
outside of his job as general which is
just astounding because as far as for
his role in history and especially
church history he's very much uh
remembered for his role as general
taking over the Jerusalem in The Siege
of
Jerusalem and as far as for when he
becomes Emperor he's remembered hardly
for anything that he did then because he
wasn't a able to do much uh he had a
2-year long Reign and it was marked by a
lot of natural disasters uh if you're
familiar with Pompei and uh the eruption
of Mount Vesuvius that happens in the
very first year of his reign as does a
plague breaking out most likely small
poox or something like this uh that
kills tons of people in Rome uh and then
on top of that in the second year of his
Reign uh there were multiple fires in
the city of Rome uh this becomes really
problematic he ends up getting sick and
actually dying soon thereafter and so
titus's Emperor doesn't really last very
long his younger brother
demission takes over
now this is where we have to deal with
very limited information with regards to
church history and the reign of
demission as far as demission is concern
we have a lot of information about his
Reign and who he was and the things that
he did we his military triumphs all
through the north Gaul modern day France
uh the area around the danu
Etc
in in a lot of Christian history classes
including the very first season of this
of of this show um the traditional
Christian reputation of Emperor
demission is is that of like second Nero
like um that there's this huge
persecution that broke out during the
reign of
demission um you know had all these
harsh policies wanted to be um you know
he he demanded that people uh worship
him as Divine uh with his title Dominus
at
Deus the problem is as I've dug into
this more and more is that a lot of that
is
hearsay and a lot of that is written way
after the time and doesn't really fit
what we know of demission now don't get
me wrong demission was not some great
person and he really did want to deify
other members of his family and
absolutely did but unanimously it seems
and
universally from everything that we have
that only happened after they
died and there's really no solid
evidence that the Domino at Deus title
uh was more than an honorary title for
people kissing up to to
him this this makes everything more
confusing because and and and we're
going to deal with this more and more as
we get into the second and third Century
uh especially when we come to the fourth
Century writing about Roman history as
Christians in a later time about an
early
history usually gets a lot of stuff
wrong and sometimes it's just for
limited information and there's nothing
wrong with that right I mean you know
some people just you know they'll go
they'll listen to irenaeus or heotis or
whatever and and hear this history and
go like oh well then that's for sure
what happened the problem is is that
there's a number of historical
inaccuracies in some of these tales and
it really becomes difficult if we're
talking about trying to settle out what
actually happened we we bump up against
what we can't really fully understand or
know the idea that Emperor demission
demanded to be called lord and God and
Christians refuse leading to a
persecution these are stories from
another era that have very little basis
in reality at best it is an
oversimplification at worst it's just
mistaken and never happened and that's
kind of this frustration in historical
studies that a lot of stuff happen that
doesn't ever get told and there's a lot
of stuff that gets told that didn't
really happen but what we can put
together is that Christians resilience
and growing distinctiveness from Judaism
does continue on um if the book of uh
first Clement uh one of the um it seems
one of the um presar at uh the Church of
Rome uh it may be written at this time
um but again that becomes problematic as
well
because a lot of people date first
Clement on this understanding that this
This calamity that has arisen in the
church in Rome was something to do with
demission but if demission doesn't do
that then that actually puts Clement
first Clement not in the 90s but back in
the late 60s or early
70s maybe even mid-70s at latest right I
mean he could have been he could have
been referring to the um the
persecutions of Nero but he doesn't even
say persecution necessarily he could
have been referring to the short Civil
War they had in Rome we don't really
know and so this becomes for us really
problematic uh to to actually date all
of this and to ensure that it all
happened as far as for demission is
concerned uh he was a capable leader um
was he crazy oh yeah he was nuts um but
as far as for uh this kind of you know
like a neonian persecution breaking out
under D mission's Reign it really gets
dicey evidence we're not um really
thoroughly sure of uh that becomes
problem and that's kind of the thing too
is that when we when we read about Nero
persecution we have multiple sources
from all over the place that that
reference this reference this and
reference that and it becomes almost
undeniable we don't have the same kind
of level of stuff like that for
demission just not at all um you know
maybe maybe there was something that
happened but we just it's really hard to
rebuild well by the time we come to the
end of the first century here and
demission you know he he is from the
year 81 to 96 15 years there um the
church in Rome by the end of the 1
Century looks a lot like the churches
elwise they would have had a group of
presb they would have had multiple house
churches you we're not we're not talking
about a time where you're building
Church buildings or basilicas or
anything like that um there would have
been uh all manner of um of attention to
theology obviously you have sharp Minds
in in the church in Rome uh especially
in the first century there I mean you
don't have a book like the book of
Romans written to you unless uh you have
a reputation for caring about things and
that really is the reputation of the
church in Rome at the very beginning
they loved theology they loved being um
uh being steeped in the word of God
their reputation gone out and and even
even a reputation for just ensuring that
theological accuracy continues and that
is a laudable thing that's a marvelous
thing um as far as this is concerned
though um there's a lot of history that
comes later that comes back and rewrites
all of this and talks about Pope this
and Pope this and the church in Rome did
not have popes there was not monarchical
Bishops in the first century that that
is well known um the only way that
you're going to hold to that is if you
uh hold to those who are in error uh
later on in church history about the
Church of Rome in the first century the
Church of Rome in the first century is
widely understood and nearly consensus
wise there were not monarchical Bishops
in Rome there's certainly no Pope or
anything like that that is we are
hundreds of years away from anything
that looks like that um so when you hear
Church in Rome in the first century
understand very different we're talking
about an actual faithful church here in
the first century that is is built on
biblical ecclesiology that that saw the
martyrdom of Peter and Paul first
Clement uh is written after the fact of
this and actually saw and he he says in
his own uh in in their own day they've
seen the the the faithful Witnesses of
of the martyrdom of Peter and Paul I
mean that that's written by an
eyewitness account of of of somebody who
is uh writing on behalf of the Church of
Rome to the church in Corinth that's
that's a pretty significant testimony to
these things which you know means again
we're probably talking about first
Clement being written in the 70s um
especially if we're calling into
question uh the any persecution under
demission that's you know that that
actually took place so uh first Clement
really kind of shows us the attitude uh
of the church in Rome at this time it's
one of my favorite letters and it's why
I released the resource episode on it
recently because I was already planning
on this episode I wanted you to be able
to experience uh how the church in Rome
wrote to another church it was no
lording over there was no our Authority
this there's no declaration this there's
no follow us we're the most holy
nothing nothing but
kindness
Fellowship brotherly
correction no lording
over and an insistence of following
biblical
patterns and that is at the close of the
first century one of the great takeaways
of the Church of Rome at the close of
the first century we're talking about a
very faithful church that is able to
help others in time of need and to do so
as the Apostle Paul says in Galatians 6
with a spirit of
gentleness um if you didn't get a chance
to go listen to the resource episode of
first Clement uh back a couple episodes
ago go take a listen to that I know it
gets a little bit difficult to uh listen
all the way through but I included the
entirety of first Clement uh as I will
be doing with with most things that I
find important to go forward things like
the deday things like the Epistle of
Barnabas I want to expose you to all of
these things in early church history so
that we can actually hear from their own
words uh what they were like and what
was going on the reputation of the
Church of Rome was admired for their
charity and their steadfastness during
persecution um it was the first church
that experienced persecution on that
level from a political Powerhouse like
the Empire like the emperor of Rome uh
before hand you would have the church in
Jerusalem that was suffering persecution
at the hands of the Jews um in in Rome
you have a much worse persecution that
took place and it was the church in Rome
that was lauded for their faithfulness
Under Fire quite
literally there was a lot of increasing
tension with Roman society after the
turn of the first century accusations of
atheism cannibalism and misunderstanding
of um of uh of things like communion uh
very anti-roman sentiment uh there was
there's always this kind of
dualism uh going on here and that is
this this kind of back and forth Rome
has this you know this concept of the
Eternal City it still calls itself that
right and but the Christian hope for a
city uh that is not of this world that
is truly Eternal you know this
this this this almost connection to the
world as far as for its power and its
strength and versus Christian meekness
right it should not be lost in us that
the Book of Revelation is also written
towards the latter half of the or not in
the latter half uh of the first century
and a good section of the book of uh
Revelation focuses also on this this
idea that there is there is evil
political and economic forces in this
world that uh see seek to unsettle uh
and destroy the church and yet you have
these these things controlled by God
these things ordained by God we can
actually depend on the purposes of God
in the midst of such things that the
Beast will be destroyed um you have
multiple reasons to think that this is
something quite early on um in the 60s
the
70s something like
this well
well as we look back on all of this I
think that is one of the great takeaways
of this church in the city of Rome is
that we are able to endure all things
for the sake of the Gospel the church in
Rome became known for its faithfulness
even when every circumstance looked
horrible um in the face of an Empire
that demanded uh Allegiance the early
church clung to the gospel of Christ um
Rome
claimed eternity it claimed the world it
claimed military and economic power
but Rome's
gone and the message of the Cross has
endured and I think that's one of the
greatest perspective Setters for
Christians in the modern
era Lord's blessings to you all
[Music]
[Applause]